N m relations (#3516)
qgis/QGIS-Documentation: source/docs/user_manual/working_with_vector/attribute_table.rst

field has also an autocompleter function: while typing you will see all the
values of the ``id`` field of the region layer.

.. index:: Many-to-many relation; Relation
.. _many_to_many_relation:

Introducing many-to-many (N-M) relations
----------------------------------------

N-M relations are many-to-many relation between two tables. For instance, the 
``airport`` and ``airline`` layers: an airport receives several airline 
companies and an airline company flies to several airports.

> .. code-block:: sql

Reviewer: that's a very good code, but I think it needs to be a little bit more verbose :) something like: "you have to run the following sql code in order to create the layers and the table...."

Author: I agree. I will change it.

Author: Changed.

      constraint airport_airline_airport_fk_fkey foreign key (airport_fk)
         references locations.airport (id)
         on delete cascade
         on update cascade
         deferrable initially deferred,
      constraint airport_airline_airline_fk_fkey foreign key (airline_fk)
         references locations.airline (id)
         on delete cascade
         on update cascade
         deferrable initially deferred
    );

We need the ``airport_airline`` table (pivot table) to list all airlines for 
all airports. In QGIS, you should setup two :ref:`one-to-many relations <one_to_many_relation>`
as explained above:

* a relation between ``airline`` table and the pivot table;
* and a second one between ``airport`` table and the pivot table.

An easier way to do it is using the :guilabel:`Discover Relations` in the 
:menuselection:`Project --> Properties --> Relations`. QGIS automatically will read
all relations in your database and you ony have to select the two you need. Remember 
to load the three tables in a QGIS project before.

.. _figure_linked_forms:

.. figure:: img/relations6.png
   :align: center

   Setup relations and autodiscover option

> In case you want to remove an ``airport`` or an ``airline``, QGIS won´t remove

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you want to remove an ``airport`` or an ``airline``, QGIS won't remove
```

in the current sample.

.. note:: **Combining N-M relation with automatic transaction group**

  You should enable the transaction mode in :menuselection:`Project Properties
  --> Data Sources -->` when working on such context. QGIS should be able to
  add or update row(s) in all tables (airlines, airports and the pivot tables).

Finally we have to select the right cardinalilty in the 
:menuselection:`Layer Properties --> Attributes Form` for the ``airport`` and 
``airline`` layers. For the first one we should choose the **airline (id)** option 
and for the second one the **airport (id)** option.

.. _figure_linked_forms:

.. figure:: img/relations7.png
   :align: center

   Set relationship cardinality

Now you can associate an airport with an airline (or an airline with an airport)
using the :guilabel:`Add child feature` or :guilabel:`Link existing child feature` 
in the subforms. Automatically a record will be inserted in the ``airport_airline`` 
table.

.. _figure_linked_forms:

.. figure:: img/relations8.png
   :align: center

   N-M relationship between airports and airlines

.. note:: Using **Many to one relation** cardinality

>   Sometimes hide the pivot table in a N-M relationship maintenance is not 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Sometimes hiding the pivot table in a N-M relationship maintenance is not 
```

>   desirable. Mainly because there attributes in the relationship that can only 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  desirable. Mainly because there are attributes in the relationship that can only 
```

>   have value when a relationship is established. If your tables are layers (has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  have values when a relationship is established. If your tables are layers (have
```

>   a geometry field) it coud be interested activate the :guilabel:`On map identification` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a geometry field) it could be interesting to activate the :guilabel:`On map identification` 
```

>   option for the foreign key fields in the pivot_table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  option for the foreign key fields in the pivot table.
```

  add or update row(s) in all tables (airlines, airports and the pivot tables).

Finally we have to select the right cardinalilty in the 
:menuselection:`Layer Properties --> Attributes Form` for the ``airport`` and 
``airline`` layers. For the first one we should choose the **airline (id)** option 
and for the second one the **airport (id)** option.

.. _figure_cardinality:

.. figure:: img/relations7.png
   :align: center

   Set relationship cardinality

Now you can associate an airport with an airline (or an airline with an airport)
using the :guilabel:`Add child feature` or :guilabel:`Link existing child feature` 
in the subforms. Automatically a record will be inserted in the ``airport_airline`` 
table.

.. _figure_relationship_working:

.. figure:: img/relations8.png
   :align: center

   N-M relationship between airports and airlines

.. note:: Using **Many to one relation** cardinality

  Sometimes hiding the pivot table in a N-M relationship maintenance is not 
  desirable. Mainly because there are attributes in the relationship that can only 
  have values when a relationship is established. If your tables are layers (have

>   a geometry field) it could be interesting to activate the :guilabel:`On map identification` 

Author: No, it is a check box option. I will clarify it.

>   a geometry field) it could be interesting to activate the :guilabel:`On map identification` 

Author: Changed.

  option for the foreign key fields in the pivot table.

.. note:: **Pivot table primary key**

  Often pivot tables use as primary key the combination of fiels used in foreign 
  keys. In our sample: *constraint airport_airline_pkey primary key (airport_fk, airline_fk)*. QGIS

>   assumes a single primary key so this is not a recommended practice.

Author: The sample uses the recommended practice but maybe the note is confusing. I will change it.

>   assumes a single primary key so this is not a recommended practice.

Author: Changed.

field has also an autocompleter function: while typing you will see all the
values of the ``id`` field of the region layer.

.. index:: Many-to-many relation; Relation
.. _many_to_many_relation:

Introducing many-to-many (N-M) relations
----------------------------------------

> N-M relations are many-to-many relation between two tables. For instance, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
N-M relations are many-to-many relations between two tables. For instance, the
```

Author: Done

> ``airports`` and ``airlines`` layers: an airport receives several airlines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``airports`` and ``airlines`` layers: an airport receives several airline
```

> N-M relations are many-to-many relation between two tables. For instance, the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
N-M relations are many-to-many relation between two tables. For instance, the
```

> ``airports`` and ``airlines`` layers: an airport receives several airline 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``airports`` and ``airlines`` layers: an airport receives several airlines
```

companies and an airline company flies to several airports.

> This SQL code creates the three tables what we need for a N-M relationship in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This SQL code creates the three tables what we need for an N-M relationship in
```

a PostgreSQL/PostGIS schema named *locations*. You can run the code using pgAdmin
or similar tools. The airports table stores the ``airports`` layer and the airlines 
table stores the ``airlines`` layer. In both tables few fields are used for 

> clarity. The *tricky* part is ``airports_airlines`` table. We need it to list all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
clarity. The *tricky* part is the ``airports_airlines`` table. We need it to list all
```

> airlines for all airports (or vice versa). This kind of tables are kwown 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
airlines for all airports (or vice versa). This kind of table is known 
```

> as *pivot tables*. The *constraints* in this table force that one airport can be 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as a *pivot table*. The *constraints* in this table force that an airport can be 
```

associated with an airline only if both already exist in their layers.

.. code-block:: sql

>    create table locations.airports

Reviewer 3: Do you want to capitalize SQL reserved words? ;-)
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/608196/why-should-i-capitalize-my-sql-keywords

Author: Done.

Reviewer 3: Thanks. I like it like this ;-)

   (
      id serial NOT NULL,
      geom geometry(Point, 4326) NOT NULL,
      airport_name text NOT NULL,
      CONSTRAINT airports_pkey PRIMARY KEY (id)
   );

   CREATE INDEX airports_geom_idx ON locations.airports USING gist (geom);

   CREATE TABLE locations.airlines
   (
      id serial NOT NULL,
      geom geometry(Point, 4326) NOT NULL,
      airline_name text NOT NULL,
      CONSTRAINT airlines_pkey PRIMARY KEY (id)
   );

   CREATE INDEX airlines_geom_idx ON locations.airlines USING gist (geom);

   CREATE TABLE locations.airports_airlines
   (
      id serial NOT NULL,
      airport_fk integer NOT NULL,
      airline_fk integer NOT NULL,
      CONSTRAINT airports_airlines_pkey PRIMARY KEY (id),
      CONSTRAINT airports_airlines_airport_fk_fkey FOREIGN KEY (airport_fk)
         REFERENCES locations.airports (id)
         ON DELETE CASCADE
         ON UPDATE CASCADE
         DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED,
      CONSTRAINT airports_airlines_airline_fk_fkey FOREIGN KEY (airline_fk)
         REFERENCES locations.airlines (id)
         ON DELETE CASCADE
         ON UPDATE CASCADE
         DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED
    );

> In QGIS, you should setup two :ref:`one-to-many relations <one_to_many_relation>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In QGIS, you should set up two :ref:`one-to-many relations <one_to_many_relation>`
```

as explained above:

* a relation between ``airlines`` table and the pivot table;
* and a second one between ``airports`` table and the pivot table.

> An easier way to do it is using the :guilabel:`Discover Relations` in the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An easier way to do it is using the :guilabel:`Discover Relations` in
```

> :menuselection:`Project --> Properties --> Relations`. QGIS automatically will read

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:menuselection:`Project --> Properties --> Relations`. QGIS will automatically read
```

all relations in your database and you only have to select the two you need. Remember 

> to load the three tables in the QGIS project before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to load the three tables in the QGIS project first.
```

.. _figure_setup_relations:

.. figure:: img/relations6.png
   :align: center

>    Setup relations and autodiscover option

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Relations and autodiscover
```

In case you want to remove an ``airport`` or an ``airline``, QGIS won't remove
the associated record(s) in ``airports_airlines`` table. This task will be made by
the database if we specify the right *constraints* in the pivot table creation as 

> in the current sample.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the current example.
```

.. note:: **Combining N-M relation with automatic transaction group**

  You should enable the transaction mode in :menuselection:`Project Properties
  --> Data Sources -->` when working on such context. QGIS should be able to
  add or update row(s) in all tables (airlines, airports and the pivot tables).

Finally we have to select the right cardinalilty in the 
:menuselection:`Layer Properties --> Attributes Form` for the ``airports`` and 
``airlines`` layers. For the first one we should choose the **airlines (id)** option 
and for the second one the **airports (id)** option.

.. _figure_cardinality:

.. figure:: img/relations7.png
   :align: center

   Set relationship cardinality

Now you can associate an airport with an airline (or an airline with an airport)

> using the :guilabel:`Add child feature` or :guilabel:`Link existing child feature` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using :guilabel:`Add child feature` or :guilabel:`Link existing child feature` 
```

> in the subforms. Automatically a record will be inserted in the ``airports_airlines`` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the subforms. A record will automatically be inserted in the ``airports_airlines`` 
```

table.

.. _figure_relationship_working:

.. figure:: img/relations8.png
   :align: center

   N-M relationship between airports and airlines

.. note:: Using **Many to one relation** cardinality

>   Sometimes hiding the pivot table in a N-M relationship maintenance is not 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Sometimes hiding the pivot table in an N-M relationship is not 
```

Reviewer 2: What does "maintenance" mean here?

Author: Insert/update/delete entities in the N side (airports) and insert/update/delete entities in the M side (airlines) using QGIS forms. Depending on the configuration QGIS automatically populates the pivot table or must be done manually by the user.

Author: Insert/update/delete entities in the N side (airports) of the relation and insert/update/delete entities  in the M side (airlines) using QGIS forms. Depending on QGIS configuration, pivot table records  can be inserted automatically (by QGIS) or manually by the user.

Reviewer 2: Does this need some more explanation?

Author: It does not, I think.

  desirable. Mainly because there are attributes in the relationship that can only 
  have values when a relationship is established. If your tables are layers (have
  a geometry field) it could be interesting to activate the :guilabel:`On map identification` 
  option (:menuselection:`Layer Properties --> Attributes Form --> Available widget --> Fields`) 
  for the foreign key fields in the pivot table.

.. note:: **Pivot table primary key**

>   Avoid using multiple fields as primary key in pivot tables. QGIS assumes a single 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Avoid using multiple fields in the primary key in a pivot table. QGIS assumes a single 
```

  primary key so a constraint like *constraint airports_airlines_pkey primary key (airport_fk, airline_fk)*

>   would be a mistake.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  will not work.
```

field has also an autocompleter function: while typing you will see all the
values of the ``id`` field of the region layer.

.. index:: Many-to-many relation; Relation
.. _many_to_many_relation:

Introducing many-to-many (N-M) relations
----------------------------------------

N-M relations are many-to-many relations between two tables. For instance, the
``airports`` and ``airlines`` layers: an airport receives several airline
companies and an airline company flies to several airports.

This SQL code creates the three tables what we need for an N-M relationship in

> a PostgreSQL/PostGIS schema named *locations*. You can run the code using `pgAdmin

Reviewer 3: Users can skip the installation of PgAdmin if they don't have it. It shouldn't be a blocker for them. They can perfectly run this SQL statements in the DBManager for PostGIS. I would mention pgAdmin only if they want to go further in database. Just my opinion

I would just add `CREATE SCHEMA locations;` at the top.

Author: I agree. Thank you.

      airport_name text NOT NULL,
      CONSTRAINT airports_pkey PRIMARY KEY (id)
   );

   CREATE INDEX airports_geom_idx ON locations.airports USING gist (geom);

   CREATE TABLE locations.airlines
   (
      id serial NOT NULL,
      geom geometry(Point, 4326) NOT NULL,
      airline_name text NOT NULL,
      CONSTRAINT airlines_pkey PRIMARY KEY (id)
   );

   CREATE INDEX airlines_geom_idx ON locations.airlines USING gist (geom);

   CREATE TABLE locations.airports_airlines
   (
      id serial NOT NULL,
      airport_fk integer NOT NULL,
      airline_fk integer NOT NULL,
      CONSTRAINT airports_airlines_pkey PRIMARY KEY (id),
      CONSTRAINT airports_airlines_airport_fk_fkey FOREIGN KEY (airport_fk)
         REFERENCES locations.airports (id)
         ON DELETE CASCADE
         ON UPDATE CASCADE
         DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED,
      CONSTRAINT airports_airlines_airline_fk_fkey FOREIGN KEY (airline_fk)
         REFERENCES locations.airlines (id)
         ON DELETE CASCADE
         ON UPDATE CASCADE
         DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED
    );

Instead of PostgreSQL you can also use GeoPackage. In this case, the three tables 

> can be created manually using the :menuselection:`Database --> DB Manager...`. In 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
can be created manually using the :menuselection:`Database --> DB Manager…`. In 
```

GeoPackage there are no schemas so the *locations* prefix is not needed.

> Foreign key constraints in ``airports_airlines`` table can´t be created using :menuselection:`Table --> Create Table...` 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Foreign key constraints in ``airports_airlines`` table can´t be created using :menuselection:`Table --> Create Table…` 
```

> or :menuselection:`Table --> Edit Table...` so they should be created using :menuselection:`Database --> SQL Window...`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or :menuselection:`Table --> Edit Table...` so they should be created using :menuselection:`Database --> SQL Window…`.
```

> GeoPackage doesn´t support *ADD CONSTRAINT* statements so the ``airports_airlines`` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GeoPackage doesn't support *ADD CONSTRAINT* statements so the ``airports_airlines`` 
```

table should be created in two step. First setup the table only with the id field 

> using :menuselection:`Table --> Create Table...` and then, using :menuselection:`Database --> SQL Window...` 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
using :menuselection:`Table --> Create Table…` and then, using :menuselection:`Database --> SQL Window…` 
```

.. _figure_cardinality:

.. figure:: img/relations7.png
   :align: center

   Set relationship cardinality

Now you can associate an airport with an airline (or an airline with an airport)
using :guilabel:`Add child feature` or :guilabel:`Link existing child feature` 
in the subforms. A record will automatically be inserted in the ``airports_airlines`` 
table.

.. _figure_relationship_working:

.. figure:: img/relations8.png
   :align: center

   N-M relationship between airports and airlines

.. note:: Using **Many to one relation** cardinality

  Sometimes hiding the pivot table in a N-M relationship maintenance is not 
  desirable. Mainly because there are attributes in the relationship that can only 
  have values when a relationship is established. If your tables are layers (have
  a geometry field) it could be interesting to activate the :guilabel:`On map identification` 
  option (:menuselection:`Layer Properties --> Attributes Form --> Available widget --> Fields`) 
  for the foreign key fields in the pivot table.

.. note:: **Pivot table primary key**

  Avoid using multiple fields in the primary key in a pivot table. QGIS assumes a single 

>   primary key so a constraint like *constraint airports_airlines_pkey primary key (airport_fk, airline_fk)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  primary key so a constraint like ``constraint airports_airlines_pkey primary key (airport_fk, airline_fk)``
```

   CREATE TABLE locations.airports_airlines
   (
      id serial NOT NULL,
      airport_fk integer NOT NULL,
      airline_fk integer NOT NULL,
      CONSTRAINT airports_airlines_pkey PRIMARY KEY (id),
      CONSTRAINT airports_airlines_airport_fk_fkey FOREIGN KEY (airport_fk)
         REFERENCES locations.airports (id)
         ON DELETE CASCADE
         ON UPDATE CASCADE
         DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED,
      CONSTRAINT airports_airlines_airline_fk_fkey FOREIGN KEY (airline_fk)
         REFERENCES locations.airlines (id)
         ON DELETE CASCADE
         ON UPDATE CASCADE
         DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED
    );

Instead of PostgreSQL you can also use GeoPackage. In this case, the three tables 
can be created manually using the :menuselection:`Database --> DB Manager…`. In 
GeoPackage there are no schemas so the *locations* prefix is not needed.

Foreign key constraints in ``airports_airlines`` table can´t be created using :menuselection:`Table --> Create Table…` 
or :menuselection:`Table --> Edit Table…` so they should be created using :menuselection:`Database --> SQL Window…`.
GeoPackage doesn't support *ADD CONSTRAINT* statements so the ``airports_airlines`` 

> table should be created in two step. First setup the table only with the id field 

Author: Better.

using :menuselection:`Table --> Create Table…` and then, using :menuselection:`Database --> SQL Window…` 
type and execute this SQL code:

> .. code-block:: sql

Author: Done.
